Create rule S6621: Constexpr literal operators should be consteval. (#1848)
SonarSource/rspec: rules/S6621/cfamily/rule.adoc

== Why is this an issue?

{cpp}20  introduces the `consteval` keyword which enforces that a function is always evaluated at compile time.

> `constexpr` functions can produce a compile-time constant in some contexts and when they are called with appropriate arguments, but they can also be invoked at run-time. `consteval` functions always be evaluated at compile-time and, if that cannot happen, a compilation error will occur.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`constexpr` functions can produce a compile-time constant in some contexts and when they are called with appropriate arguments, but they can also be invoked at run-time. `consteval` functions must always be evaluated at compile-time and, if that cannot happen, a compilation error will occur.
```

== Why is this an issue?

{cpp}20  introduces the `consteval` keyword, which enforces that a function is always evaluated at compile time.

`constexpr` functions can produce a compile-time constant in some contexts and when called with appropriate arguments, but they can also be invoked at run-time.
`consteval` functions must always be evaluated at compile-time. If that cannot happen, a compilation error will occur.

User-defined literal operators are designed to be called with constant operands known at compile time.
Therefore, if these are intended to be evaluated at compile time with `constexpr`, `consteval` should be used instead to enforce compile time evaluation.

> This allows unnecessary calls to be avoided, and errors can be detected at compilation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This guarantees that no code is evaluated at run-time, and also enables error detection at compile-time.
```

== Why is this an issue?

> {cpp}20 version of the standard introduces the ``++consteval++`` keyword, allowing for enforcing compile time evaluation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
{cpp}20  introduces the `consteval` keyword which enforces that a function is always evaluated at compile time.
```

> Unlike calls to ``++constexpr++`` functions, that are treated as ``++inline++`` when they cannot produce a compile time constant expression, calls to ``++consteval++`` functions must always produce a constant expression.
> 
> 
> If a call is made to a ``++consteval++`` function that cannot produce a compile time constant expression, a compilation error will occur.

Reviewer 2: I think that the fact that `constexpr` implied inline is a detail that distracts from the main point.

```suggestion
`constexpr` functions can produce a compile-time constant in some contexts and when they are called with appropriate arguments, but they can also be invoked at run-time. `consteval` functions always be evaluated at compile-time and, if that cannot happen, a compilation error will occur.
```

> In the case of user-defined literal operators, the parameters of said functions is always constant and known at compile time. Therefore, if these are intended to be evaluated at compile time with ``++constexpr++``, ``++consteval++`` should be used instead to enforce compile time evaluation. By doing this, unnecessary calls can be avoided, and errors can be detected at compilation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
User-defined literal operators are designed to be called with constant operands known at compile time. Therefore, if these are intended to be evaluated at compile time with `constexpr`, `consteval` should be used instead to enforce compile time evaluation. By doing this, unnecessary calls can be avoided, and errors can be detected at compilation.
```

=== Noncompliant code example

[source,cpp]
----

> #include <stdexcept>

Reviewer 2: We usually remove boilerplate code

```suggestion
```

Reviewer 3: Should the example then throw a literal directly? To make it directly compilable

```diff
constexpr unsigned char operator ""_u8(unsigned long long value) {
- if (value >= 256u) { throw std::overflow_error("Overflow on literal"); }
+ if (value >= 256u) { throw "Overflow on literal"; }
  return static_cast<unsigned char>(value);
}
```

Reviewer 2: I think it would be promoting bad practices, so no.

We don't really care about having compilable examples (there are some Trello cards about that, but all such cards would set up a mechanism so that the displayed example is just a sub-part of the full example).

constexpr unsigned char operator ""_u8(unsigned long long value) {
  if (value >= 256u) { throw std::overflow_error("Overflow on literal"); }
  return static_cast<unsigned char>(value);
}

void f() {

>   unsigned char const a = 128_u8; // evaluated at compile time

Reviewer 2: Should `auto` be used, since the type is obvious (in the spirit of [S5827](https://sonarsource.github.io/rspec/#/rspec/S5827))?

>   unsigned char const b = 512_u8; // evaluated at runtime

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  unsigned char const b = 512_u8; // evaluated at runtime, throws when evaluated
```

}
----

=== Compliant solution

[source,cpp]
----

> #include <stdexcept>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

consteval unsigned char operator ""_u8(unsigned long long value) {
  if (value >= 256u) { throw std::overflow_error("Overflow on literal"); }
  return static_cast<unsigned char>(value);
}

void f() {
  unsigned char const a = 128_u8; // evaluated at compile time

>   unsigned char const b = 512_u8; // compilation error

Reviewer 2: Compilation error may sound bad, while there is it good:
```suggestion
  unsigned char const b = 512_u8; // compilation error, the bug is detected
```
